docs/observability.md, before:

# Observability Guide

Copyright 2026 Firefly Software Solutions Inc. Licensed under the Apache License 2.0.

The Observability module provides OpenTelemetry-native tracing, custom metrics, and
event recording for GenAI workloads.

---

## Architecture

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    APP[Application Code] --> DEC["Decorators<br/>(@traced, @metered)"]
    DEC --> TRACER[FireflyTracer]
    DEC --> METRICS[FireflyMetrics]
    APP --> EVENTS[FireflyEvents]
    TRACER --> OTEL[OpenTelemetry SDK]
    METRICS --> OTEL
    EVENTS --> OTEL
    OTEL --> EXP["Exporters<br/>(OTLP, Console, Jaeger)"]
```

---

## Tracing

`FireflyTracer` wraps the OpenTelemetry `Tracer` and adds convenience methods for
creating spans with GenAI-specific attributes (model name, token counts, agent name).

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.observability import FireflyTracer

tracer = FireflyTracer(service_name="my-genai-app")

with tracer.start_span("agent.run", attributes={"agent.name": "writer"}) as span:
    result = await agent.run("Hello")
    span.set_attribute("tokens.total", result.usage.total_tokens)
```

### The @traced Decorator

For convenience, the `@traced` decorator automatically creates a span around any
function call:

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.observability import traced

@traced(name="process_request")
async def process_request(prompt: str) -> str:
    ...
```

### Distributed Trace Correlation

The framework supports **W3C Trace Context** propagation for correlating traces
across service boundaries (HTTP, message queues, pipelines).

**Trace Context Functions:**

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.observability.tracer import inject_trace_context, extract_trace_context

# Inject trace context into HTTP headers
headers = {}
inject_trace_context(headers)
# headers now contain: traceparent, tracestate

# Send request with trace context
response = await http_client.post(url, headers=headers)

# On receiving side, extract trace context
incoming_headers = request.headers
context = extract_trace_context(incoming_headers)
# Continue trace with extracted context
```

**REST API Integration:**

The framework's REST API automatically propagates trace context:

```python
# Middleware injects trace context into responses
# and extracts from incoming requests
from fireflyframework_genai.exposure.rest.middleware import add_trace_propagation_middleware

add_trace_propagation_middleware(app)
```

**Queue Integration:**

Message queue consumers/producers automatically propagate trace context:

```python
# Kafka example - trace context in message headers
from fireflyframework_genai.exposure.queues.kafka import KafkaConsumer

consumer = KafkaConsumer(
    topic="requests",
    handler=process_message,
)
# Trace context automatically extracted from message headers
```

**Pipeline Context:**

Traces flow through pipeline steps via `PipelineContext.correlation_id`:

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.pipeline.context import PipelineContext

# Create context with correlation ID for trace linking
context = PipelineContext(
    inputs={},
    correlation_id="trace-abc-123",
)

result = await pipeline.run(context)
# All steps share the same trace correlation ID
```

---

## Metrics

`FireflyMetrics` provides counters, histograms, and gauges for tracking GenAI-specific
measurements.

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.observability import FireflyMetrics

metrics = FireflyMetrics(service_name="my-genai-app")
metrics.increment("agent.invocations", labels={"agent": "writer"})
metrics.record_histogram("agent.latency_ms", 142.5, labels={"agent": "writer"})
```

### The @metered Decorator

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.observability import metered

@metered(name="agent_call")
async def call_agent(prompt: str) -> str:
    ...
```

---

## Events

`FireflyEvents` emits structured events (as OpenTelemetry log records) for significant
occurrences: agent started, tool invoked, reasoning step completed, error encountered.

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.observability import FireflyEvents

events = FireflyEvents()
events.emit("agent.started", {"agent": "writer", "model": "gpt-4o"})
```

---

## Exporters

The `configure_exporters` function sets up OpenTelemetry exporters based on the
framework's configuration:

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.observability import configure_exporters

configure_exporters(
    otlp_endpoint="http://localhost:4317",
    console=True,
)
```

Supported exporters:

- **OTLP** -- Sends traces and metrics to any OpenTelemetry-compatible collector.
- **Console** -- Prints spans and metrics to standard output (useful for development).

---

## Usage Tracking

The `UsageTracker` automatically records token usage, cost estimates, and latency
for every agent run, reasoning pattern step, and pipeline execution.

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.observability import default_usage_tracker

# After running agents, inspect accumulated usage
summary = default_usage_tracker.get_summary()
print(f"Total tokens: {summary.total_tokens}")
print(f"Total cost: ${summary.total_cost_usd:.4f}")
print(f"Requests: {summary.total_requests}")

# Filter by agent or pipeline correlation ID
agent_summary = default_usage_tracker.get_summary_for_agent("my-agent")
pipeline_summary = default_usage_tracker.get_summary_for_correlation("run-123")
```

### Bounded Record Storage

`UsageTracker` accepts a `max_records` parameter that limits how many records
are retained in memory. When the limit is exceeded, the oldest records are
evicted (FIFO). This prevents unbounded memory growth in long-running services.

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.observability.usage import UsageTracker

tracker = UsageTracker(max_records=5_000)
```

The default `max_records` is controlled by the `FIREFLY_GENAI_USAGE_TRACKER_MAX_RECORDS`
environment variable (default: `10_000`). Set to `0` for unlimited retention
(not recommended for production).

Note: cumulative cost (`cumulative_cost_usd`) is tracked independently and
is **not** affected by record eviction — it always reflects the total
lifetime cost.

### How It Works

`FireflyAgent.run()`, `run_sync()`, and `run_stream()` automatically extract
`result.usage()` from Pydantic AI results, compute cost via the configured cost
calculator, and feed a `UsageRecord` into the global `default_usage_tracker`.
For streaming, usage is captured when the stream context manager exits
(`__aexit__`), ensuring that token counts from streamed responses are tracked
transparently. Reasoning patterns do the same for each ephemeral LLM call in
`_structured_run()`. Pipeline runs aggregate all records by `correlation_id`
into `PipelineResult.usage`.

---

## Cost Calculation

Two cost calculator implementations are provided:

- **`StaticPriceCostCalculator`** — uses a built-in lookup table with prices for
  OpenAI, Anthropic, Google, DeepSeek, and Groq models. Supports exact and prefix
  matching (e.g. `openai:gpt-4o-2024-08-06` matches `openai:gpt-4o`).
- **`GenAIPricesCostCalculator`** — delegates to the optional `genai-prices` package
  for up-to-date pricing data. Install with `pip install fireflyframework-genai[costs]`.

The `get_cost_calculator()` factory selects the best available calculator based on
the `FIREFLY_GENAI_COST_CALCULATOR` setting (`"auto"`, `"static"`, or `"genai_prices"`).

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.observability import get_cost_calculator

calc = get_cost_calculator()
cost = calc.estimate("openai:gpt-4o", input_tokens=1000, output_tokens=500)
print(f"Estimated cost: ${cost:.6f}")
```

---

## Budget Enforcement

Configure budget thresholds via environment variables:

```bash
export FIREFLY_GENAI_BUDGET_ALERT_THRESHOLD_USD=5.00
export FIREFLY_GENAI_BUDGET_LIMIT_USD=10.00
```

When cumulative cost exceeds the alert threshold, a `WARNING` is logged.
When it exceeds the hard limit, a more urgent warning is emitted.
Budget checking runs automatically on every `UsageTracker.record()` call.

To disable cost tracking entirely:

```bash
export FIREFLY_GENAI_COST_TRACKING_ENABLED=false
```

---

## API Quota Management

The `QuotaManager` provides production-grade quota enforcement with rate limiting,
daily budget caps, and adaptive backoff for 429 rate limit responses.

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.observability.quota import QuotaManager

quota = QuotaManager(
    daily_budget_usd=100.0,
    rate_limits={
        "openai:gpt-4o": 60, # 60 requests/minute
        "anthropic:claude-opus-4": 50,
    },
    adaptive_backoff=True,
)

# Check before making request
if not quota.check_budget_available(cost_usd=0.05):
    raise QuotaError("Daily budget exceeded")

if not quota.check_rate_limit_available("openai:gpt-4o"):
    # Apply backoff delay
    delay = quota.get_backoff_delay("openai:gpt-4o")
    await asyncio.sleep(delay)

# Record usage after request
quota.record_request("openai:gpt-4o", cost_usd=0.05, tokens=1500)
```

### Rate Limiting

`RateLimiter` implements a **sliding window** algorithm for precise rate limiting:

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.observability.quota import RateLimiter

limiter = RateLimiter(max_requests=60, window_seconds=60.0)

if limiter.is_allowed("openai:gpt-4o"):
    # Make request
    limiter.record("openai:gpt-4o")
else:
    raise RateLimitError("Rate limit exceeded")
```

The sliding window ensures accurate rate limiting without bursts at window boundaries.

### Adaptive Backoff

`AdaptiveBackoff` automatically increases retry delays for 429 responses:

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.observability.quota import AdaptiveBackoff

backoff = AdaptiveBackoff(
    base_delay=1.0, # Start at 1 second
    max_delay=60.0, # Cap at 60 seconds
    multiplier=2.0, # Double each time
    jitter_factor=0.1, # Add 10% jitter
)

# After receiving 429 response
delay = backoff.next_delay("openai:gpt-4o")
await asyncio.sleep(delay)

# On success, reset
backoff.reset("openai:gpt-4o")
```

Exponential backoff with jitter prevents thundering herd issues when rate limits reset.

### Automatic Rate Limit Retry

`FireflyAgent.run()` automatically retries on HTTP 429 (rate limit) errors using
adaptive backoff. This is transparent — callers do not need to handle rate limits.

The retry loop:
1. Catches `ModelHTTPError(429)` and exceptions with "rate limit" in the message
2. Parses `Retry-After` hints from error bodies when available
3. Uses `AdaptiveBackoff` for exponential delay with jitter
4. Resets backoff on success

Configuration via environment variables or `FireflyGenAIConfig`:

| Variable | Default | Description |
|----------|---------|-------------|
| `FIREFLY_GENAI_RATE_LIMIT_MAX_RETRIES` | `3` | Max retry attempts for 429 errors |
| `FIREFLY_GENAI_RATE_LIMIT_BASE_DELAY` | `1.0` | Base delay in seconds |
| `FIREFLY_GENAI_RATE_LIMIT_MAX_DELAY` | `60.0` | Maximum delay between retries |

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.config import get_config, reset_config
import os

# Configure via environment
os.environ["FIREFLY_GENAI_RATE_LIMIT_MAX_RETRIES"] = "5"
os.environ["FIREFLY_GENAI_RATE_LIMIT_BASE_DELAY"] = "2.0"
reset_config()  # Pick up new values

# Or read current config
cfg = get_config()
print(f"Max retries: {cfg.rate_limit_max_retries}")
print(f"Base delay: {cfg.rate_limit_base_delay}s")
print(f"Max delay: {cfg.rate_limit_max_delay}s")
```

When `quota_enabled` is `True` (the default), the agent uses the global
`QuotaManager`'s `AdaptiveBackoff` instance for shared state across all agents.
When disabled, each agent creates a standalone backoff tracker.

### Environment Configuration

```bash
# Enable quota management (default: true)
export FIREFLY_GENAI_QUOTA_ENABLED=true

# Set daily budget cap
export FIREFLY_GENAI_QUOTA_BUDGET_DAILY_USD=100.0

# Configure per-model rate limits (JSON)
export FIREFLY_GENAI_QUOTA_RATE_LIMITS='{"openai:gpt-4o": 60, "anthropic:claude-opus-4": 50}'

# Enable adaptive backoff (default: true)
export FIREFLY_GENAI_QUOTA_ADAPTIVE_BACKOFF=true

# Rate limit retry settings
export FIREFLY_GENAI_RATE_LIMIT_MAX_RETRIES=3
export FIREFLY_GENAI_RATE_LIMIT_BASE_DELAY=1.0
export FIREFLY_GENAI_RATE_LIMIT_MAX_DELAY=60.0
```

### Integration with Agents

Quota enforcement can be integrated via middleware or direct checks:

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.agents import FireflyAgent
from fireflyframework_genai.agents.builtin_middleware import CostGuardMiddleware

# Budget enforcement via middleware
agent = FireflyAgent(
    name="quota-agent",
    model="openai:gpt-4o",
    middleware=[CostGuardMiddleware(budget_usd=10.0)],
)

# Or manual quota checks
quota = QuotaManager(daily_budget_usd=100.0)

async def call_with_quota(prompt):
    if not quota.check_budget_available():
        raise QuotaError("Daily budget exhausted")

    result = await agent.run(prompt)
    quota.record_request(agent.model, cost_usd=result.usage.total_cost)
    return result
```

---

## JSON Structured Logging

For production log aggregation (ELK, Datadog, CloudWatch), the framework
provides a `JsonFormatter` that emits log records as single-line JSON objects
with `timestamp`, `level`, `logger`, and `message` fields.

Enable JSON logging with the `format_style` parameter:

```python
from fireflyframework_genai import configure_logging

configure_logging("INFO", format_style="json")
```

Example output:

```json
{"timestamp": "2026-01-15T10:30:00+00:00", "level": "INFO", "logger": "fireflyframework_genai.agents.base", "message": "run agent='writer' prompt='Write a...'"}
```

The `JsonFormatter` class can also be used standalone with any Python logger:

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.logging import JsonFormatter
import logging

handler = logging.StreamHandler()
handler.setFormatter(JsonFormatter())
```

---

## Integration with Agents

Observability is designed to integrate transparently with the Agent layer. When an
agent is invoked, the framework automatically creates a trace span, records metrics,
emits events, and records usage for cost tracking. You do not need to instrument
agent code manually unless you want additional detail.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant App
    participant Agent
    participant Tracer
    participant Metrics
    participant Events
    participant UsageTracker

    App->>Agent: run(prompt)
    Agent->>Tracer: start span
    Agent->>Events: emit agent.started
    Agent->>Agent: execute LLM call
    Agent->>Metrics: record latency + tokens
    Agent->>UsageTracker: record usage + cost
    Agent->>Events: emit agent.completed
    Agent->>Tracer: end span
    Agent-->>App: result
```

Commit message:

feat: multi-provider support hardening for observability and resilience
Add centralized model_utils module for uniform model identity extraction
across strings and Model objects. Fix cost tracking with cross-provider
price resolution (Bedrock→Anthropic, Azure→OpenAI, Ollama→free). Fix
prompt cache to route by model family instead of string matching. Extend
rate limit detection for Bedrock ThrottlingException. Update fallback
wrapper to accept Model objects and track model identifier on swap.

docs/observability.md, after:

# Observability Guide

Copyright 2026 Firefly Software Solutions Inc. Licensed under the Apache License 2.0.

The Observability module provides OpenTelemetry-native tracing, custom metrics, and
event recording for GenAI workloads.

---

## Architecture

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    APP[Application Code] --> DEC["Decorators<br/>(@traced, @metered)"]
    DEC --> TRACER[FireflyTracer]
    DEC --> METRICS[FireflyMetrics]
    APP --> EVENTS[FireflyEvents]
    TRACER --> OTEL[OpenTelemetry SDK]
    METRICS --> OTEL
    EVENTS --> OTEL
    OTEL --> EXP["Exporters<br/>(OTLP, Console, Jaeger)"]
```

---

## Tracing

`FireflyTracer` wraps the OpenTelemetry `Tracer` and adds convenience methods for
creating spans with GenAI-specific attributes (model name, token counts, agent name).

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.observability import FireflyTracer

tracer = FireflyTracer(service_name="my-genai-app")

with tracer.start_span("agent.run", attributes={"agent.name": "writer"}) as span:
    result = await agent.run("Hello")
    span.set_attribute("tokens.total", result.usage.total_tokens)
```

### The @traced Decorator

For convenience, the `@traced` decorator automatically creates a span around any
function call:

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.observability import traced

@traced(name="process_request")
async def process_request(prompt: str) -> str:
    ...
```

### Distributed Trace Correlation

The framework supports **W3C Trace Context** propagation for correlating traces
across service boundaries (HTTP, message queues, pipelines).

**Trace Context Functions:**

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.observability.tracer import inject_trace_context, extract_trace_context

# Inject trace context into HTTP headers
headers = {}
inject_trace_context(headers)
# headers now contain: traceparent, tracestate

# Send request with trace context
response = await http_client.post(url, headers=headers)

# On receiving side, extract trace context
incoming_headers = request.headers
context = extract_trace_context(incoming_headers)
# Continue trace with extracted context
```

**REST API Integration:**

The framework's REST API automatically propagates trace context:

```python
# Middleware injects trace context into responses
# and extracts from incoming requests
from fireflyframework_genai.exposure.rest.middleware import add_trace_propagation_middleware

add_trace_propagation_middleware(app)
```

**Queue Integration:**

Message queue consumers/producers automatically propagate trace context:

```python
# Kafka example - trace context in message headers
from fireflyframework_genai.exposure.queues.kafka import KafkaConsumer

consumer = KafkaConsumer(
    topic="requests",
    handler=process_message,
)
# Trace context automatically extracted from message headers
```

**Pipeline Context:**

Traces flow through pipeline steps via `PipelineContext.correlation_id`:

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.pipeline.context import PipelineContext

# Create context with correlation ID for trace linking
context = PipelineContext(
    inputs={},
    correlation_id="trace-abc-123",
)

result = await pipeline.run(context)
# All steps share the same trace correlation ID
```

---

## Metrics

`FireflyMetrics` provides counters, histograms, and gauges for tracking GenAI-specific
measurements.

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.observability import FireflyMetrics

metrics = FireflyMetrics(service_name="my-genai-app")
metrics.increment("agent.invocations", labels={"agent": "writer"})
metrics.record_histogram("agent.latency_ms", 142.5, labels={"agent": "writer"})
```

### The @metered Decorator

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.observability import metered

@metered(name="agent_call")
async def call_agent(prompt: str) -> str:
    ...
```

---

## Events

`FireflyEvents` emits structured events (as OpenTelemetry log records) for significant
occurrences: agent started, tool invoked, reasoning step completed, error encountered.

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.observability import FireflyEvents

events = FireflyEvents()
events.emit("agent.started", {"agent": "writer", "model": "gpt-4o"})
```

---

## Exporters

The `configure_exporters` function sets up OpenTelemetry exporters based on the
framework's configuration:

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.observability import configure_exporters

configure_exporters(
    otlp_endpoint="http://localhost:4317",
    console=True,
)
```

Supported exporters:

- **OTLP** -- Sends traces and metrics to any OpenTelemetry-compatible collector.
- **Console** -- Prints spans and metrics to standard output (useful for development).

---

## Usage Tracking

The `UsageTracker` automatically records token usage, cost estimates, and latency
for every agent run, reasoning pattern step, and pipeline execution.

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.observability import default_usage_tracker

# After running agents, inspect accumulated usage
summary = default_usage_tracker.get_summary()
print(f"Total tokens: {summary.total_tokens}")
print(f"Total cost: ${summary.total_cost_usd:.4f}")
print(f"Requests: {summary.total_requests}")

# Filter by agent or pipeline correlation ID
agent_summary = default_usage_tracker.get_summary_for_agent("my-agent")
pipeline_summary = default_usage_tracker.get_summary_for_correlation("run-123")
```

### Bounded Record Storage

`UsageTracker` accepts a `max_records` parameter that limits how many records
are retained in memory. When the limit is exceeded, the oldest records are
evicted (FIFO). This prevents unbounded memory growth in long-running services.

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.observability.usage import UsageTracker

tracker = UsageTracker(max_records=5_000)
```

The default `max_records` is controlled by the `FIREFLY_GENAI_USAGE_TRACKER_MAX_RECORDS`
environment variable (default: `10_000`). Set to `0` for unlimited retention
(not recommended for production).

Note: cumulative cost (`cumulative_cost_usd`) is tracked independently and
is **not** affected by record eviction — it always reflects the total
lifetime cost.

### How It Works

`FireflyAgent.run()`, `run_sync()`, and `run_stream()` automatically extract
`result.usage()` from Pydantic AI results, compute cost via the configured cost
calculator, and feed a `UsageRecord` into the global `default_usage_tracker`.
For streaming, usage is captured when the stream context manager exits
(`__aexit__`), ensuring that token counts from streamed responses are tracked
transparently. Reasoning patterns do the same for each ephemeral LLM call in
`_structured_run()`. Pipeline runs aggregate all records by `correlation_id`
into `PipelineResult.usage`.

---

## Cost Calculation

Two cost calculator implementations are provided:

- **`StaticPriceCostCalculator`** — uses a built-in lookup table with prices for
  OpenAI, Anthropic, Google, DeepSeek, Groq, Mistral, and Ollama models. Supports
  exact match, prefix match (e.g. `openai:gpt-4o-2024-08-06` matches `openai:gpt-4o`),
  and **cross-provider alias matching** for proxy providers.
- **`GenAIPricesCostCalculator`** — delegates to the optional `genai-prices` package
  for up-to-date pricing data. Install with `pip install fireflyframework-genai[costs]`.

The `get_cost_calculator()` factory selects the best available calculator based on
the `FIREFLY_GENAI_COST_CALCULATOR` setting (`"auto"`, `"static"`, or `"genai_prices"`).

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.observability import get_cost_calculator

calc = get_cost_calculator()
cost = calc.estimate("openai:gpt-4o", input_tokens=1000, output_tokens=500)
print(f"Estimated cost: ${cost:.6f}")
```

### Cross-Provider Price Resolution

When a model identifier uses a proxy provider (Bedrock, Azure, Groq), the
static calculator automatically resolves pricing through the canonical provider:

| Model identifier | Resolves to | Pricing source |
|---|---|---|
| `azure:gpt-4o` | `openai:gpt-4o` | OpenAI pricing |
| `bedrock:anthropic.claude-3-5-sonnet-latest` | `anthropic:claude-3-5-sonnet-latest` | Anthropic pricing |
| `ollama:llama3.2` | `ollama:` prefix | Free (local) |

This ensures cost tracking works correctly regardless of which provider
routes the request to the underlying model.

---

## Budget Enforcement

Configure budget thresholds via environment variables:

```bash
export FIREFLY_GENAI_BUDGET_ALERT_THRESHOLD_USD=5.00
export FIREFLY_GENAI_BUDGET_LIMIT_USD=10.00
```

When cumulative cost exceeds the alert threshold, a `WARNING` is logged.
When it exceeds the hard limit, a more urgent warning is emitted.
Budget checking runs automatically on every `UsageTracker.record()` call.

To disable cost tracking entirely:

```bash
export FIREFLY_GENAI_COST_TRACKING_ENABLED=false
```

---

## API Quota Management

The `QuotaManager` provides production-grade quota enforcement with rate limiting,
daily budget caps, and adaptive backoff for 429 rate limit responses.

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.observability.quota import QuotaManager

quota = QuotaManager(
    daily_budget_usd=100.0,
    rate_limits={
        "openai:gpt-4o": 60, # 60 requests/minute
        "anthropic:claude-opus-4": 50,
    },
    adaptive_backoff=True,
)

# Check before making request
if not quota.check_budget_available(cost_usd=0.05):
    raise QuotaError("Daily budget exceeded")

if not quota.check_rate_limit_available("openai:gpt-4o"):
    # Apply backoff delay
    delay = quota.get_backoff_delay("openai:gpt-4o")
    await asyncio.sleep(delay)

# Record usage after request
quota.record_request("openai:gpt-4o", cost_usd=0.05, tokens=1500)
```

### Rate Limiting

`RateLimiter` implements a **sliding window** algorithm for precise rate limiting:

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.observability.quota import RateLimiter

limiter = RateLimiter(max_requests=60, window_seconds=60.0)

if limiter.is_allowed("openai:gpt-4o"):
    # Make request
    limiter.record("openai:gpt-4o")
else:
    raise RateLimitError("Rate limit exceeded")
```

The sliding window ensures accurate rate limiting without bursts at window boundaries.

### Adaptive Backoff

`AdaptiveBackoff` automatically increases retry delays for 429 responses:

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.observability.quota import AdaptiveBackoff

backoff = AdaptiveBackoff(
    base_delay=1.0, # Start at 1 second
    max_delay=60.0, # Cap at 60 seconds
    multiplier=2.0, # Double each time
    jitter_factor=0.1, # Add 10% jitter
)

# After receiving 429 response
delay = backoff.next_delay("openai:gpt-4o")
await asyncio.sleep(delay)

# On success, reset
backoff.reset("openai:gpt-4o")
```

Exponential backoff with jitter prevents thundering herd issues when rate limits reset.

### Automatic Rate Limit Retry

`FireflyAgent.run()` automatically retries on HTTP 429 (rate limit) errors using
adaptive backoff. This is transparent — callers do not need to handle rate limits.

The retry loop:
1. Catches `ModelHTTPError(429)` and exceptions with "rate limit" or "throttl" in the message
2. Detects Bedrock `ThrottlingException` and `TooManyRequestsException` (boto3 `ClientError` shapes)
3. Parses `Retry-After` hints from error bodies when available
4. Uses `AdaptiveBackoff` for exponential delay with jitter
5. Resets backoff on success

Configuration via environment variables or `FireflyGenAIConfig`:

| Variable | Default | Description |
|----------|---------|-------------|
| `FIREFLY_GENAI_RATE_LIMIT_MAX_RETRIES` | `3` | Max retry attempts for 429 errors |
| `FIREFLY_GENAI_RATE_LIMIT_BASE_DELAY` | `1.0` | Base delay in seconds |
| `FIREFLY_GENAI_RATE_LIMIT_MAX_DELAY` | `60.0` | Maximum delay between retries |

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.config import get_config, reset_config
import os

# Configure via environment
os.environ["FIREFLY_GENAI_RATE_LIMIT_MAX_RETRIES"] = "5"
os.environ["FIREFLY_GENAI_RATE_LIMIT_BASE_DELAY"] = "2.0"
reset_config()  # Pick up new values

# Or read current config
cfg = get_config()
print(f"Max retries: {cfg.rate_limit_max_retries}")
print(f"Base delay: {cfg.rate_limit_base_delay}s")
print(f"Max delay: {cfg.rate_limit_max_delay}s")
```

When `quota_enabled` is `True` (the default), the agent uses the global
`QuotaManager`'s `AdaptiveBackoff` instance for shared state across all agents.
When disabled, each agent creates a standalone backoff tracker.

### Environment Configuration

```bash
# Enable quota management (default: true)
export FIREFLY_GENAI_QUOTA_ENABLED=true

# Set daily budget cap
export FIREFLY_GENAI_QUOTA_BUDGET_DAILY_USD=100.0

# Configure per-model rate limits (JSON)
export FIREFLY_GENAI_QUOTA_RATE_LIMITS='{"openai:gpt-4o": 60, "anthropic:claude-opus-4": 50}'

# Enable adaptive backoff (default: true)
export FIREFLY_GENAI_QUOTA_ADAPTIVE_BACKOFF=true

# Rate limit retry settings
export FIREFLY_GENAI_RATE_LIMIT_MAX_RETRIES=3
export FIREFLY_GENAI_RATE_LIMIT_BASE_DELAY=1.0
export FIREFLY_GENAI_RATE_LIMIT_MAX_DELAY=60.0
```

### Integration with Agents

Quota enforcement can be integrated via middleware or direct checks:

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.agents import FireflyAgent
from fireflyframework_genai.agents.builtin_middleware import CostGuardMiddleware

# Budget enforcement via middleware
agent = FireflyAgent(
    name="quota-agent",
    model="openai:gpt-4o",
    middleware=[CostGuardMiddleware(budget_usd=10.0)],
)

# Or manual quota checks
quota = QuotaManager(daily_budget_usd=100.0)

async def call_with_quota(prompt):
    if not quota.check_budget_available():
        raise QuotaError("Daily budget exhausted")

    result = await agent.run(prompt)
    quota.record_request(agent.model, cost_usd=result.usage.total_cost)
    return result
```

---

## JSON Structured Logging

For production log aggregation (ELK, Datadog, CloudWatch), the framework
provides a `JsonFormatter` that emits log records as single-line JSON objects
with `timestamp`, `level`, `logger`, and `message` fields.

Enable JSON logging with the `format_style` parameter:

```python
from fireflyframework_genai import configure_logging

configure_logging("INFO", format_style="json")
```

Example output:

```json
{"timestamp": "2026-01-15T10:30:00+00:00", "level": "INFO", "logger": "fireflyframework_genai.agents.base", "message": "run agent='writer' prompt='Write a...'"}
```

The `JsonFormatter` class can also be used standalone with any Python logger:

```python
from fireflyframework_genai.logging import JsonFormatter
import logging

handler = logging.StreamHandler()
handler.setFormatter(JsonFormatter())
```

---

## Integration with Agents

Observability is designed to integrate transparently with the Agent layer. When an
agent is invoked, the framework automatically creates a trace span, records metrics,
emits events, and records usage for cost tracking. You do not need to instrument
agent code manually unless you want additional detail.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant App
    participant Agent
    participant Tracer
    participant Metrics
    participant Events
    participant UsageTracker

    App->>Agent: run(prompt)
    Agent->>Tracer: start span
    Agent->>Events: emit agent.started
    Agent->>Agent: execute LLM call
    Agent->>Metrics: record latency + tokens
    Agent->>UsageTracker: record usage + cost
    Agent->>Events: emit agent.completed
    Agent->>Tracer: end span
    Agent-->>App: result
```
